[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Eastern Wisdom and Modern
Life with Alan W. Watts.
Produced by KQED, San
Francisco for the Educational
and Television and Radio Center.
Alan Watts is a
scholar, lecturer,
and the author of
many widely read books
on comparative
philosophy and religion.
>>I have often
puzzled and puzzled
about what it must be like to
go to sleep and never wake up.
be simply not there
forever and ever.
After all, one has
some intimation
of this by the
interval that separates
going to sleep from waking.
When we don't have any
dreams, but go to sleep,
and then suddenly,
we're there again.
And in the interim,
there was nothing.
And if there was never
any end to that interval,
if the waking up didn't happen,
that's such a curious thought.
And yet, you know, I believe
that although that's rather
gloomy kind of
consideration, I found
that's one of the most
creative thoughts I ever
thought in my life.
And I keep going back to it.
It's in line with a lot of
the very fundamental questions
that children ask when they
say, "Mommy, who would I
have been if you're
married someone else?"
These are the kinds of questions
that make us puzzle profoundly
about our existence.
And one of the
reasons why, I think,
thinking about not being,
about total non-existence,
is so creative, is that in
comparison with that thought,
the fact that we are
seems kind of queer.
Incredibly odd.
But in the Western
world, I suppose
we have two dominant ideas about
what happens to us when we die.
There's the old fashioned
idea that after we
die we go to another world.
I say old fashioned, not
to say it's out of date.
We don't know what
the answer to this is.
But that's the traditional
answer of the Western world.
When you die you
go to another life.
Maybe heaven, maybe purgatory,
maybe hell, who knows?
I think nowadays, though,
the more general idea,
the more plausible
idea to many people
is that when we die
we just cease to be.
That's all there is to it.
But we're inclined, I
think, to have in our minds
a picture of this, which indeed,
is depressing of being shut up
in the dark for always,
and always, always.
To be kind of buried
alive in a blackness
where we are blind,
deaf, and dumb
but somehow still conscious.
But in the Eastern world, there
are different ideas of this.
The major Eastern idea
is what is generally
known as a reincarnation.
Of going through life,
after life, after life
in an endless series.
A process that is represented
in this Japanese print
of the Wheel of Life, the
Buddhist Wheel of Life.
This painting was lent
to me by Mr. and Mrs.
Imamura of Berkeley
in California.
He used to be the priest of
the Berkeley Buddhist Church.
And it shows the wheel
of stages of existence
through which
beings pass clutched
by the great demon
of impermanence.
This is rather an
unusual representation
of the Wheel of Life.
Perhaps some of you
have seen these before.
They usually have six
divisions in the central part
of the wheel here.
And this one happens
to have five,
and it's the Chinese-Japanese
version of the Wheel of Life.
Whereas, I think,
prints in books--
I know there was one some years
ago in "Life" magazine usually
show the Tibetan version.
But what we have here,
and I think what I'll do,
is I'll explain to begin with
the popular interpretation
of it.
And then go on to see what more
philosophical Buddhists think
of it in a deeper way.
These then are the five,
or sometimes six realms
of existence through
which, as I said,
beings pass through
their various lives.
We could start
here, for example.
This is the human world.
And then next to this is the
world of the Devas, D-E-V-A,
which we would translate
into English as angel.
Then this is the
world of the animals.
This is the world that is
sometimes called the hells.
Only that's not quite
a correct term for it.
It should be called the
world of the purgatories,
because in this scheme
of the universe,
there is no everlasting state.
There's no everlasting
heaven and there's
no everlasting hell.
The Demon of Impermanece
clutches the whole thing,
and they all terminate.
Next to the hells, there is
the realm of what are called
pretas, P-R-E-T-A. They
are frustrated spirits,
sometimes shown with very large
stomachs and very tiny mouths.
Enormous appetite, but very
small means of satisfying it.
And the idea is, you
see, that in the course
of his development,
the individual
goes through life after life.
If he does well, he ascends
towards the heavens.
If he does ill, he
descends to the hells.
Or you may fall from the human
state to the animal state.
Or fall from the human state
to the state of the ghosts.
But the point that has to be
remembered in the Buddhist
idea of transmigration
or reincarnation,
is that you can
never stop anywhere.
You may ascend to
heaven, but what goes up
must eventually come down.
You may descend to
hell, but what goes down
must eventually come up.
And so one goes on and on moving
through these various world's
until in Buddhist ideas
you become sufficiently
awakened to become a Buddha, one
who is released from the wheel.
And who does not fall anymore
into the sequence of rebirth
but enters the eternal
state of nirvana.
Now if you will
look closer again,
you will see that there
are a number of figures
around the outside of the wheel.
And these represent
what is called
the 12-fold chain of
dependent origination.
That is to say,
they are a series
of links which form what might
be called the sequence of life.
They are, as it were,
a schematic diagram
of the force or the process
that keeps this wheel rotating.
And the chain starts with a
demon down at the bottom here
who represents ignorance,
or perhaps unconsciousness,
the state of not knowing.
Then next in order, you
will see a potter's wheel.
And this represents
potentialities of life.
Next comes a monkey who
represents consciousness.
A man in a boat.
For some reason this
represents the combination
of name and form.
Words bringing out shapes.
Words identifying shapes
and things in the world.
Here comes sense
consciousness, the five senses.
A man's body with
the senses exposed.
And here comes contact,
a pair of lovers.
After this, there
comes perception.
I'm not quite sure what the
symbol in this wheel is.
It seems to show a man with
a sword behind a screen
and two women playing
in front of the screen.
The usual symbol you'll
find here for perception
is a man with an arrow in his
eye showing the pain involved
in the perception of the world.
The next in the link is desire.
It shows a woman with twins.
The next one here
is called grasping,
and that shows a man with
a basket into which he
is trying to get
the fruits of life.
And then as we come
over around the wheel,
we get a figure,
which means growth.
I think this is one of
the gods of prosperity.
But it means growth,
the fullness of life.
Here is birth, a
woman in parturition.
Here is old age.
And then, although
the final stage
of the links of dependent
origination as they
are usually drawn, shows
this one as the last,
and calls it old age and death.
In this particular
wheel, they've
been spread out, so that you get
old age, grief-- no, excuse me,
this is sickness.
Old age, sickness, death,
grief, compassion, suffering
and, again back into ignorance.
Here's another
figure of ignorance,
the camel being
led by a blind man.
Now what I want you to notice
particularly about this
is that the chain represents
what is called in Sanskrit
the process of karma.
I'm going to write
that word because it's
very fundamental
to an understanding
of this whole problem.
Karma is sometimes
understood, and maybe
your ordinary dictionaries
give it to you,
as the law of cause and effect.
But actually, it comes
from the route Kri-
which in Sanskrit
means to act or to do.
And the basic idea
of karma is that it
is action which always involves
the necessity for other action.
As the Buddha once expressed
it, this arises, that becomes.
Now this isn't quite the same
thing as cause and effect.
It is rather the
idea of linkage.
For example, when I pick up this
brush, I lift it by one end,
and the other end comes up.
Now we could say, this
is cause and effect,
although this would be a rather
cumbersome way of thinking
about it.
I could say, for
example, that the coming
up of the brush at this end
is the effect of the cause
my lifting it at this end.
But we don't ordinarily think
so complicatedly about it.
We think in a simpler
fashion, namely,
that to pick up this end is
also to lift up that end,
because it's all one.
So in the same way,
Buddhists and Hindus
who follow the idea of karma,
believe that life and death
involve each other
in the same way
that the two ends of
the brush lifting up one
involves lifting up the other.
So in this way,
living involves dying.
We wouldn't say that the
cause of death is birth.
But birth and death go together
and they are inseparable.
And so if we will look again
for a moment at the wheel,
we can see that there are
these important phases of it
all together.
Here it ends with the sequence
of pictures representing
death and suffering and
its attendant grief.
Ending in the blind
man leading the camel,
and the demon, which
together, represent
ignorance or unconsciousness.
But once again here, we have
the potentiality of life,
and then the monkey
representing consciousness.
All these things are looked
upon as linked and therefore
inseparable.
And thus, you see, we
don't look upon ignorance
as the first step or the
first link in the chain
from a chronological
point of view.
We only start numbering
the steps of the change
here, because one has to begin
somewhere when one's talking.
And so the basic
idea of this link
is interrelatedness,
interlockness,
so that death and life, as
I said, imply each other.
So that you might, speaking
from the standpoint
of Indian philosophy of
Hinduism, of Buddhism,
you might pick an argument
with Hamlet and say,
to be or not to be
is not the question.
These are not alternatives.
They are things that go together
just like up and down, back
and front, solid and space.
Now there's another
aspect to karma,
which needs to be
considered here.
And that is that
karma also involves
the idea of the
continuity of pattern.
You know, strictly
speaking, Buddhists
don't believe that there
is any soul entity which
passes from one life to another.
There is no sort of fixed
eye, or fixed ego which
once was an animal,
and then became a man,
and then became
an angel, and then
eventually became a Buddha
or something like that.
The idea of karma as
the linking factor
between the various
lives is what
we might call
continuity of pattern.
For example, consider
an army regiment.
A certain regiment goes on
year, after year, after year.
Old European
regiments, for example,
have existed for
hundreds of years.
And yet, the personnel
of those regiments,
and even the barracks in
which they are stationed,
are entirely changed.
In the same way a university.
Harvard University has
existed for a long time.
Oxford for a lot longer.
And yet, there is
not a single member
of the faculty, not
a single student,
who was there when
it first began.
And yet, you see, the
university goes on.
Because what goes on is a
pattern, a form of life.
In the same way, the individual
body of man, every seven years,
I think, all the
molecules composing out
physical structure
are entirely changed.
And yet, something identifiable
as the pattern, which
we associate with Mr. or Mrs.
So-and-So, is still there.
Another fascinating illustration
of continuity of pattern,
in a sense, is wave motion.
It's perhaps easiest
to illustrate
with something like
a barber's pole.
When you twirl it,
now as you twirl it,
there's an illusion of
something moving upwards
from the bottom to
the top of the pole.
It seems that the
strips go along.
Now actually, they
don't go along.
They just go round.
And in the same way, also,
when waves move across water,
there's no water
moving across, there
is the wave pattern
moving across.
The water is just
going up and down
as you can tell when you see,
say, a dead leaf floating
on the water's surface, and it
isn't moved along by the waves.
So this idea of
continuity of pattern
is the solution which
Indian philosophy
offers on the matter of
the problem of death.
The individual as it were
entity is constantly changing.
He does not go on, but
the pattern or the karma,
the pattern of action, goes on.
And it's all embraced
by that figure
you saw of the great
Demon of Impermanence.
Could we look at that
demon once again?
I want to say something
more about him.
From our Western ideas, this
fellow looks pretty evil.
And we might associate him
with the devil in the Hebrew
or Christian sense of
a principle of evil.
In Buddhism, demons
are not evil.
They are really benevolence.
They have a frightening
aspect, but underneath this
there is a deeper meaning.
This demon represents
change or impermanence.
But deep inside,
underlying this,
is that change is a
liberating factor.
Death is a liberating factor.
Did it not exist, life
would not exist either.
And, therefore, the wise man
is not afraid of the demon.
He goes as it were
straightforward to him
to embrace him,
and at that moment,
the demon is transformed.
So in the same way
in a deeper sense,
Buddhists do not think
of these various realms
of the wheel as
literal worlds where
there are angels, and
demons, and starved ghosts.
But they represent the various
phases of conscienceness.
Equanimity, a general kind
of medium consciousness,
quiet consciousness
as the human state.
The angel state is
supreme happiness.
The animal state
is an animality.
Here is misery in
its extreme, and here
is frustration in its extreme.
But the fundamental
idea of the whole wheel
that we have to remember,
the idea of karma,
is the interlocking,
the interdependence,
of being and not being,
of death and life.
And the fact that
the demon of change
is really a disguise of
the very source of life.
The death, without which,
life is impossible.
The change, without which,
life is totally boring.
Now, of course, when any
idea like that is explained,
the first thing that
we ask is is it true?
Is there a process of rebirth?
Do our patterns go on
and on and have influence
to an illimitable future?
But as this idea is held
by deeply thoughtful Hindus
and Buddhists, it isn't
a belief in something
which we can't prove.
It's really quite a
self-evident notion.
Think of it in this way.
Supposing I make two statements.
Statement one-- after I
die, I shall be reborn again
as a baby, but I shall
forget my former life.
Statement two-- after I
die, a baby will be born.
Now I believe that
those two statements
are saying exactly
the same thing.
And we know that the
second one is true.
Babies are always being born.
Conscious beings of
all kinds of constantly
coming into existence
after others die.
But why would I think that
the two statements are really
the same statement?
Because after all, if you
die and your memory comes
to an end, and you forget
who you were, being reborn
again is exactly the equivalent
of somebody else being born.
Because we have no
consciousness of our continuity
unless we have memory.
If the memory goes, then
we might just as well
be somebody else.
But it seems to me that the
fascinating thing about this
is that, although a particular
set of memories vanish,
death is not the end
of consciousness.
In other words, we are
diluted by a kind of fantasy.
If we think of death as endless
darkness, endless nothingness,
is not only inconceivable,
but it's logically
absolutely meaningless.
Because we aren't
able to have any idea,
much less sensation,
of nothing unless it
can be compared with the
sensation of something.
These two things go together.
And, therefore, I
think what is meant
is that the vacuum created by
the disappearance of a being,
by the disappearance
of his memory system
is simply filled by
another being who
is I just as you feel you're I.
The funny thing
about being I, about
feeling that one is sort of
a center of the universe,
is that you can only
experience this I sensation
in the singular.
You can't experience
being two or three
I's all at the same time.
Now then, it seems
to me that this idea
has three very
important consequences.
One is that the disappearance
of our memory in death
is not really something
to be regretted.
Of course, everybody wishes to
hold forever to the memories
and to the people
and the situations
that he particularly loves.
But surely, if we
think this through,
is that what we actually want?
Do we really want to have those
we love, however greatly we
love them, always, and always,
and always, and always?
Isn't it inconceivable that
even in a very distant future,
we wouldn't get tired of it?
And this, indeed, is
the secret to the thing.
This is why the Demon of
Impermanence is benevocent.
Because it is
forgetting about things
that renews their wonder.
Just think, when
you opened your eyes
on the world for the
first time as a child,
how brilliant colors were.
What a jewel the sun was.
What marvels the stars.
How incredibly alive
the trees were.
That's all because they
were new to your eyes.
Or in the same way,
you know how it
is, you've been reading
a mystery story.
And you're looking
around the house
and want something to read,
and you pick up an old mystery
story.
If you read it
years and years ago,
and you've forgotten all about
the plot, it still excites you.
But if you remember the
plot, it doesn't excite you.
And so by the dispensation
of forgetting,
the world is constantly renewed.
And we are able to see it again
and again, and to love again
and again you have
people to whom
we are deeply attached
and deeply fond,
always with renewed intensity.
And without the contrast
all having seen them before,
before, before for always,
and always, and always.
Another consequence of this is a
very curious realization to me.
Remember that
question, who would I
be if my mother had
married someone else?
If I were you, we
often said, one
might so easily have been you.
I might so easily have been
born in China and India.
Why do I feel that
the world is centered
in this place as distinct
from some other place?
You jolly well know the world
is centered where you are.
And this gives one a
very strange feeling
of the idea that other
people jolly well
existed in the
same sense you do.
Everybody's name is I. That's
what you call yourself.
So there will always
be I's in the world.
Every I is, in a way, the same
I. We all might be anyone else,
and there is no escape.
It goes on, and
on, and on, and on.
So long as there is
consciousness anywhere,
there is I.
You then, in a way, look out
through all I's, and that
perhaps is the secret of the
great virtue of compassion.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is National
Educational Television.